In Gertrude¡¯s chamber, the queen and Polonius wait for Hamlet¡¯s arrival. Polonius plans to hide in order to eavesdrop on Gertrude¡¯s confrontation with her son, in the hope that doing so will enable him to determine the cause of Hamlet¡¯s bizarre and threatening behavior. Polonius urges the queen to be harsh with Hamlet when he arrives, saying that she should chastise him for his recent behavior. Gertrude agrees, and Polonius hides behind an arras, or tapestry.
Hamlet storms into the room and asks his mother why she has sent for him. She says that he has offended his father, meaning his stepfather, Claudius. He interrupts her and says that she has offended his father, meaning the dead King Hamlet, by marrying Claudius. Hamlet accosts her with an almost violent intensity and declares his intention to make her fully aware of the profundity of her sin. Fearing for her life, Gertrude cries out. From behind the arras, Polonius calls out for help. Hamlet, realizing that someone is behind the arras and suspecting that it might be Claudius, cries, ¡°How now! a rat?¡± (III.iv.22). He draws his sword and stabs it through the tapestry, killing the unseen Polonius. Gertrude asks what Hamlet has done, and he replies, ¡°Nay, I know not: / Is it the king?¡± (III.iv.24). The queen says his action was a ¡°rash and bloody¡± deed, and Hamlet replies that it was almost as rash and bloody as murdering a king and marrying his brother (III.iv.26¨C28). Disbelieving, the queen exclaims, ¡°As kill a king!¡± and Hamlet replies that she heard him correctly (III.iv.29).
Hamlet lifts the arras and discovers Polonius¡¯s body: he has not killed the king and achieved his revenge but has murdered the relatively innocent Polonius. He bids the old man farewell, calling him an ¡°intruding fool¡± (III.iv.30). He turns to his mother, declaring that he will wring her heart. He shows her a picture of the dead king and a picture of the current king, bitterly comments on the superiority of his father to his uncle, and asks her furiously what has driven her to marry a rotten man such as Claudius. She pleads with him to stop, saying that he has turned her eyes onto her soul and that she does not like what she sees there. Hamlet continues to denounce her and rail against Claudius, until, suddenly, the ghost of his father again appears before him.
Hamlet speaks to the apparition, but Gertrude is unable to see it and believes him to be mad. The ghost intones that it has come to remind Hamlet of his purpose, that Hamlet has not yet killed Claudius and must achieve his revenge. Noting that Gertrude is amazed and unable to see him, the ghost asks Hamlet to intercede with her. Hamlet describes the ghost, but Gertrude sees nothing, and in a moment the ghost disappears. Hamlet tries desperately to convince Gertrude that he is not mad but has merely feigned madness all along, and he urges her to forsake Claudius and regain her good conscience. He urges her as well not to reveal to Claudius that his madness has been an act. Gertrude, still shaken from Hamlet¡¯s furious condemnation of her, agrees to keep his secret. He bids her goodnight, but, before he leaves, he points to Polonius¡¯s corpse and declares that heaven has ¡°punished me with this, and this with me¡± (III.iv.158). Hamlet reminds his mother that he must sail to England with Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, whom he says he will regard with suspicion, as though they were poisonous snakes, since he assumes that their loyalties are with Claudius, not with him. Dragging Polonius¡¯s body behind him, Hamlet leaves his mother¡¯s room.
